---
permalink: "/steps/07-hw.wasm.html"
title: "Hello, WASM!"
layout: "post"
prev: 
    url: "/steps/06-rust+wasm.html"
    text: "Rust+WASM"
next:
    url: "/steps/07.1-hw_bg.js.html"
    text: "JS bindings"
---
## Getting Setup
<div class="explain">
Before we get started we need to make sure that a few more things are installed.
</div>

### Install the Nightly Compiler

```bash
$ rustup install nightly
```
<p class="explain">This will allow us to use some experimental rust features.</p>

### Install the `wasm32-unknown-unknown` Target
```bash
$ rustup target add wasm32-unknown-unknown --toolchain nightly
```
<p class="explain">This will allow us to actually compile to Web Assembly, specifically for the nightly compiler we just installed</p>

### Install Wasm-Bindgen's CLI tool
```bash
$ cargo install wasm-bindgen-cli
```
<div class="explain">
<p>This will install a cli application <code>wasm-bindgen</code>, this is going to read our <code>.wasm</code> file and generate a javascript file for us.</p>

<p>Now that our environment can handle building a wasm project, let's get something working. We are going to use the same <code>lib.rs</code> file that we were using before but we need to update a few things about our project.</p>

<p>first we can delete the main.rs file, you don't have to but it might trip you up.</p>

<p>Once we have done that we need to update our <code>Cargo.toml</code> file with some new information. It is going to look like this.</p>
</div>

#### Cargo.toml
```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
authors = ["robert masen <r@robertmasen.pizza>"]

[dependencies]
wasm-bindgen = "0.2"

[lib]
crate-type = ["cdylib"]
```
<div class="explain">
<p>First we added a dependency <code>wasm-bindgen = "0.2"</code>, this will make a bunch of glue code available to us. </p>
<p>
The other thing we changed was adding a <code>[lib]</code> section and including the line <code>crate-type = ["cdylib"]</code>, this will tell cargo that we want to create a "C Dynamic Library" this will make sure our library is consumable from languages other than Rust. Now that we have our configuration right, lets dig back into the code. We really just need to make a few small changes to our existing <code>lib.rs</code> file.
</p>
</div>

#### lib.rs
```rust
#![feature(proc_macro, wasm_custom_section, wasm_import_module)]
extern crate wasm_bindgen;
use wasm_bindgen::prelude::*;

#[wasm_bindgen]
pub fn generate_greeting() -> String {
    "Hello, world!".to_string()
}
#[wasm_bindgen]
pub fn generate_custom_greeting(name: &str) -> String {
    format!("Hello, {}!", name)
}
```
<div class="explain">
<p>
First we added a new line to the top of the file (<code>#![feature(...)]</code>), this is turning on a few custom features that are not normally enabled in rust.
</p>
<ul>
<li>
<code>proc_macro</code>: This enables procedural macros, a special kind of rust code we will be using
</li>
<li>
<code>wasm_custom_section</code>: This tells the compiler to add a non-standard section to our <code>.wasm</code> file
</li>
<li>
<code>wasm_import_module</code>: This instructs the compiler to include functionality from another wasm module
</li>
</ul>
<p>
After that, we define our need for the external library <code>extern crate wasm_bindgen;</code> and then import everything in that library's prelude module with <code>use wasm-bindgen::prelude::*;</code>. This makes everything we need from that library available to us.
</p>
<p>
We also need to annotate the functions with the <code>#[wasm_bindgen]</code> procedural macro. If you are familiar with attributes in C# or decorators in TypeScript and Python, it is the same concept, if you are not this will just add a bunch of that glue code I was referring to earlier.
</p>
<p>
With those changes, we can now build our wasm module. We are going to use the new stuff we added with our <code>rustup</code> and <code>cargo</code> commands earlier.
</p>
</div>

```bash
$ cargo +nightly build --target wasm32-unknown-unknown
```
<div class="explain">
<p>Notice that we put <code>+nightly</code> in there, this is shorthand for telling <code>cargo</code> to use the nightly compiler instead of the stable one</p>
<p>The first time you run this it will might take a little while.</p>
<p>Once that is complete you would have a <code>.wasm</code> file in the <code>./target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/debug/</code> folder.</p>
<p>The next step is to generate our bindings. We can use that <code>wasm-bindgen</code> command line tool we installed like so.</p>
</div>

```bash
$ wasm-bindgen ./target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/debug/hello_world.wasm --out-dir .
```

<div class="explain">
This will generate 2 files in our project's root folder, <code>hello_world_bg.wasm</code> and <code>hello_world.js</code>.
lets take a look at the <code>.js</code> file.
</div>