---
permalink: "/steps/10.1-define.html"
title: "Bincode Parser"
layout: "post"
prev: 
    url: "/steps/10.0.1-message.html"
    text: "Message"
next: 
    url: "/steps/10.2-build-the-wasm.html"
    text: "Build the Web Assembly"
---
<div class="explain">
To get started we are going to add the required <code>feature</code>, <code>extern crate</code>, and <code>use</code> statements. This isn't too much different from our hello world example, just more stuff needs to be imported.
</div>

```rust
#![feature(proc_macro, wasm_custom_section, wasm_import_module)]
extern crate bincode;
extern crate serde;
extern crate serde_json;
extern crate wasm_bindgen;
use wasm_bindgen::prelude::*;

extern crate wasm_tutorial_shared;

use wasm_tutorial_shared::models::{Message, ToDo};
```
<div class="explain">
Next we want to import the <code>console.log</code> function from <code>js</code>. We do that by defining an <code>extern</code> block and annotating that with some <code>wasm_bindgen</code> macros.
</div>

```rust
#[wasm_bindgen]
extern {
    #[wasm_bindgen(js_namespace = console)]
    fn log(s: &str);
}
```
<div class="explain">
<p>
First the <code>extern</code> block will tell the compiler that we are defining some non-rust code, inside that we are going to name the function we are importing which is <code>log</code> taking a single string. Notice that we used <code>(js_namespace = console)</code> when we defined <code>log</code>, that is because we need to provide a hint to the compiler that the <code>JS</code> side of things will need the <code>console</code> constant in front of it.
</p>
<p>
Up next we are going to define our function for converting <code>bincode</code> encoded bytes to <code>JSON</code> strings and vice versa.
</p>
</div>

```rust
#[wasm_bindgen]
pub fn bincode_to_json(buffer: Vec<u8>) -> String {
    log("bincode_to_json");
    if let Ok(msg) = Message::from_bytes(buffer) {
        match msg {
            Message::All(todos) => {
                if let Ok(ser) = serde_json::to_string(&todos) {
                    return ser
                }
            },
            Message::Error(msg) => {
                print(&format!("Error getting todos from msg {}", msg));
            },
            _ => print("Incorrect message type")
        }
    }
    "[]".into()
}
```
<div class="explain">
<p>Since <code>bincode</code> is just a list of raw 8 bit unsigned integers, we are going to expect that is what comes from the <code>JS</code> code. Once we have that, we can try and convert it from raw bytes into a <code>Message</code> using the <code>from_bytes</code> constructor. In this case, we don't have much to do if this fails so we are just going to let the function return an empty JSON array if it does, that allows us to use <code>if let Ok(msg)</code>, this will only enter the block if deserialization was successful. Once we know that we have successfully created a <code>Message</code> we are going to use <code>match</code> to check if it is either an <code>All</code> or <code>Error</code>, if it is anything else we would end up in the <code>_</code> branch, there we just want to log that it happened for debugging. Also for the error case we really just want to print the error to the browser's console, however if the message is the <code>All</code> case, then we want to assign the associated value to a variable named <code>todos</code>. Once we have our list of <code>ToDo</code>s, we want to try and serialize that into JSON, technically this might fail but that is actually a pretty slim possibility so we are going to use the <code>if let</code> to just let our empty JSON array be the fallback if it does. If <code>serde_json::to_string</code> is successful, that means we can return the string to our JS caller.
</p>
<p>
...but I thought Rust didn't use the <code>return</code> keyword, how come you are here?
</p>
<p>Very astute of you, Rust does allow you to use this keyword, you can actually use it all the time if that is what floats your boat. The Rust style guide encourages you to only use <code>return</code> in the case of an early return, like what we are doing here.
</p>
<p>That should handle all of the messages we will need to receive from the server, now lets go the other way.</p>
</div>

```rust
#[wasm_bindgen]
pub fn get_add_message(action: String) -> Vec<u8> {
    let todo = ToDo::new(action);
    let msg = Message::Add(todo);
    msg.to_bytes()
}

#[wasm_bindgen]
pub fn get_update_message(id: i32, complete: bool, action: String) -> Vec<u8> {
    let todo = ToDo {
        id,
        complete,
        action
    };
    let msg = Message::Update(todo);
    msg.to_bytes()
}

#[wasm_bindgen]
pub fn get_remove_message(id: i32) -> Vec<u8> {
    let msg = Message::Remove(id);
    msg.to_bytes()
}
#[wasm_bindgen]
pub fn get_all_message() -> Vec<u8> {
    Message::GetAll.to_bytes()
}
```
<div class="explain">
<p>These functions are a little more straight forward than the last one, they take in each of the important properties of a <code>ToDo</code> item and constructs them on the <code>wasm</code> side of things. Once that is done we just construct the message and use the <code>to_bytes()</code> method that will return the bincode representation.</p>
<p>
Since Rust doesn't have any special constructor function, you can see here how we build our model instances. Building a struct is very similar to building javascript objects, just put the type in front, followed by some curly braces and set each of the values, you can even use the same "object short notation" from ES6 if your variable is the same as your property. For enums, you are going to use the type name and then two colons (<code>::</code>) and the case, if that case has an associated value you would need to provide an instance of that value in the parentheses. You can also see that we use that same double colon to call static methods on our types like <code>ToDo::new(action)</code>. Now that we have all this setup, lets try and build it.
</p>
</div>
